---
layout: post
cover: 'assets/images/pipelines.jpg'
title: Jenkins 2.0 - Pipelines with NodeJS
date:   2017-02-03 05:00:00
tags: technologies
subclass: 'post tag-content tag-technologies'
categories: 'jt'
navigation: True
logo: 'assets/images/logo.png'
---

## Future of Jenkins: The Jenkinsfile

The future of Jenkins and CI/CD is having "Pipelines" as code. Delivery pipelines are thought of as a first-class entity in Jenkins 2.0. Just like your typical `.yml` configuration file from Travis, Circle or other popular CI tools - Jenkins 2.0 has been released with a similar concept. Jenkins has the capability with a Pipeline plugin to use Pipelines as code in `Jenkinsfile`s. Users can now model their software delivery pipelines much easier. Another key feature is that the `Jenkinsfile` can be checked into version control.

## Creating A Pipeline For NodeJS Application

### Prerequisites**

* Setup Jenkins with AWS plugin for build agents
* Configure Github plugin to receive PUSH webhooks from git hosted repository
* Configure NodeJS plugin to install selected NodeJS versions for each Jenkins build

** future tutorial for configurations

### NodeJS Application

When building a modern web application many people are moving towards NodeJS and the community around NodeJS to power the future of technologies. One practice I definitely advocate especially in JavaScript, because of it's dynamic typing system, is TDD so you have clarity on how your application "should" run and perform. I am a big advocate for testing with [Jest](https://github.com/facebook/jest) but there are also test libraries like Mocha, Chai, PhantomJS, and others to accomplish TDD.

### Sample Application

I have a small [express.js](https://github.com/expressjs/express) server application that we will use to walk through this pipeline tutorial.**

Note: this application really is only to proof tests and run a "Hello World" express application.

** Github repository: [here](https://github.com/jtaylor32/jenkins-pipeline-express)

### Application Is Ready

After our application is ready to push to Testing, Staging, Production, etc. we need to have a simple way for Jenkins to orchestrate our workflow. Jenkinsfiles can easily get us up and running with pipelines. We start with a specific **node**, or server, in our pipeline to fire off our build process on that machine. Because we are using AWS EC2s -- we can make our node's labels specific to a build agent inside of our Manage Jenkins > Configure System.

Here we have a build agent up called 'testing' that will run the first process in our pipeline.

#### Testing Node
1. use our NodeJS plugin to install version 7.4.0
2. checkout code from version control
3. install dependencies for running tests
4. run tests on testing environment
5. publish our results inside of our Jenkins job's build page

~~~
node('testing') {
    stage('Initialize') {
        echo 'Initializing...'
        def node = tool name: 'Node-7.4.0', type: 'jenkins.plugins.nodejs.tools.NodeJSInstallation'
        env.PATH = "${node}/bin:${env.PATH}"
    }

    stage('Checkout') {
        echo 'Getting source code...'
        checkout scm
    }

    stage('Build') {
        echo 'Building dependencies...'
        sh 'npm i'
    }

    stage('Test') {
        echo 'Testing...'
        sh 'npm test'
    }

    stage('Publish') {
        echo 'Publishing Test Coverage...'
		publishHTML (target: [
			allowMissing: false,
			alwaysLinkToLastBuild: false,
			keepAll: true,
			reportDir: 'coverage/lcov-report',
			reportFiles: 'index.html',
			reportName: "Application Test Coverage"
		])
    }
}
~~~
{: .language-groovy}

If anything inside of our 'testing' node fails it will not move on to the next 'staging' node. So if our `npm test` fails it will publish that and Jenkins will see that tests failed do not move this application to staging.

We can also add in manual approvals inside of our pipelines with the `input` function.

`input 'Is the application ready for Staging?'`

We won't add that inside of here but there are really awesome things that pipelines can do for us you can check out later on... Onto Staging!

#### Staging Node
1. use our NodeJS plugin to install version 7.4.0
2. checkout code from version control
3. install PM2 globally
4. install dependencies
5. run tests on staging environment
6. stop and start our application with PM2

~~~
node('staging') {
    stage('Initialize'){
        echo 'Initializing...'
        def node = tool name: 'Node-7.4.0', type: 'jenkins.plugins.nodejs.tools.NodeJSInstallation'
        env.PATH = "${node}/bin:${env.PATH}"

        sh "node -v"

        // set environment variables
        env.VARIABLE_1="10"
        env.VARIABLE_2="7"
    }

    stage('Checkout') {
        echo 'Getting source code...'
        checkout scm
    }

    stage('PM2 Install') {
        echo 'Installing PM2 to run application as daemon...'
        sh "npm install pm2 -g"
    }

    stage('Build') {
        echo 'Building dependencies...'
        sh 'npm i'
    }

    stage('Test') {
        echo 'Testing...'
        sh 'npm test'
    }

    stage('Run Application') {
        echo 'Stopping old process to run new process...'
        sh '''
        # show our env variables
        env

        npm run pm2-stop
        npm run pm2-start
        '''
    }
}
~~~
{: .language-groovy}

#### Environment Variables
If you noticed inside of the staging node I set `env` variables specific to that node so that I can run my Express application with those configurations and not have to worry about hard coding that into my code.

Here is a snippet from my express application that we can reference those environment variables. This is key when dealing with multiple environments and application settings for production applications -- write our code once kind of thing.

~~~
const envOne = process.env.VARIABLE_1;
const envTwo = process.env.VARIABLE_2;
~~~
{: .language-JavaScript}

### Wrapping Up

You can do advanced features in pipeline builds to stash, archive, spin up or tear down servers, and many more -- but this should be a simple way to show how we can do it with a basic starter application. I will put out another article on how to integrate AWS, NodeJS, Github and other useful plugins so that we can production ready for CI/CD with Jenkins.
